The qualified and diverse study panel responsible for “Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030”
could not foresee the unusual events that have occurred since 2016; these events have altered 
the plans of almost everyone, as well as the path of AI. The report did a good job of reviewing
AI’s progress in the years up to 2015; however, its future advances and challenges missed the
mark in a few areas. An example of this is the Stanford article’s statement, “Autonomous vehicles
will soon be commonplace.” The report references an article that inaccurately predicts self-driving
cars to be widely adopted by 2020, with 10 million self-driving cars on the road (Greenough, 2016).
Most of the article was more conservative which reduces unnecessary concerns of AI growing 
out of control, yet necessary controls may not be timely implemented. Increasingly important 
is NATO’s implementation of AI policies regarding global ethics, economy, and 
security (Kasapoglu, Kirdemir, 2019). 

With respect to transportation, the implementation of autonomous transportation has been slower 
than the panel predicted. The report states this increase in autonomous vehicles would result in 
city dwellers living further from work and own fewer cars due to ridesharing. The more conservative
and general prediction that self-controlled delivery vehicles, flying vehicles, trucks, and 
ridesharing vehicles “will likely be used” was more on target. The panel was not alone in making 
these aggressive projections for self-driving vehicles. In 2016, car makers were also caught up
in the AI hype, and many predicted to have driverless cars in mass production by 2020, Most have 
changed their goals to simply “having” truly self-driving cars between 2020 and 2030 (Faggalla, 2016). 

The article, “It’s 2020, Where Are Our Self-Driving Cars?” explains why the predictions in 2016 
were off. Autonomous cars rely on collecting lots of data for all the possible situations when 
driving. This process has proven to be more expensive and even more sophisticated than expected
in 2016 (Piper, 2020). In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic in 2019 has been an unforeseen event 
that caused a pause in rollouts and  purchases of new self-driving cars as many people have 
transitioned to working at home(Boll, 2020). Furthermore, a few fatal accidents and lack of 
demand for ridesharing during a pandemic has reduced the number of new self-driving cars 
implemented. 

Overall, wide use of autonomous vehicles will likely take several additional decades 
(Gessner, 2020). The focus on the fight against COVID-19 has likely moved AI resources to other
discussed applications of AI including health, robotics, and analytics. The article “Finding a
role for AI in the pandemic” talks about how the sharing of code in predictive software isn’t
as easy as copying the lines of C (Nat. Mach. Intell, 2020). Many industries have joined the 
fight against COVID-19 and it takes time to refactor the code and make it reusable. With regards
to transportation, when industries and people are willing to invest in self-driving vehicles and
the technology is truly ready, the adaptation of autonomous vehicles may speed up as people look
for ways travel safely, especially if travel restrictions continue.  
